Document the new fuel limit (#3299)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/compiler-options/compiling-deeply-nested-code.md

---
layout: singlepage-overview
title: Compiling Deeply Nested Code
versionSpecific: false
---

## Compiling Deeply Nested Code

Scala's type system is expressive enough to describe types with deeply nested or recursive structure. When the compiler operates on such types, it may recurse very deeply and eventually exhaust its allocated stack. This can happen with incorrect code whose recursion never terminates, but also with correct code whose recursion is simply too deep.

**Starting with Scala 3.9.0**, the compiler tracks its stack use using "fuel", an abstract resource.
Recursive operations in the compiler consume fuel, and once a predefined fuel limit is reached, compilation fails.
This ensures the compiler does not run out of stack space, which would cause it to crash instead.

**In Scala 2 and Scala 3.8 or earlier**, the compiler attempts to catch stack overflows, which is not always reliable.

### Did I hit a compiler bug?

For **Scala 3.9 and newer**:
- If you get a `StackOverflowError`, and you did **not** set `-Xmax-fuel`, nor any JVM option related to stack space (when running on the JVM),

>   yes, that's a compiler bug, because the compiler should run out of fuel before hitting a stack overflow.

Reviewer: is parser guarded by fuel?

Author: everything that currently uses `handleRecursive` on main to catch stack overflow is being migrated to use the fuel, doesn't look like this includes parser files though? https://github.com/scala/scala3/pull/25937/changes

  These are not considered compiler bugs.
  Please increase the stack space as discussed below, or refactor your types so that they are not as deeply nested.

For **Scala 3.8 and earlier**, as well as **Scala 2**:
- Stack overflows are not considered compiler bugs unless they do not go away no matter how much extra stack space you add.
  In that case, then it's a compiler bug. Please report it on the [Scala 2 bug tracker](https://github.com/scala/bug/issues)
  or [Scala 3 bug tracker](https://github.com/scala/scala3/issues), but check first if it's a duplicate of an existing ticket.

### I ran out of fuel... (Scala 3.9+)

This means your types contain unusually deep recursion.

First, think about whether this is intentional. Perhaps you accidentally wrote a match type that recurses infinitely because it has no base case, for instance.

If it is intentional, you must increase the fuel limit, **and** increase the stack space if you are on a platform that allows this, see below.

### Increasing the fuel limit (Scala 3.9+)

To increase the fuel limit, pass `-Xmax-fuel:...` to the compiler.

> You can check the default limit with ...TODO how?...

Author: would be nice to not have to tell people "run scalac -X and look for the right option"

Reviewer: `scala -X` is cross portable

Author: https://github.com/scala/scala3/pull/26052

Author: ```suggestion
You can check the default limit by calling the compiler with `-Xmax-fuel:help`.
```

versionSpecific: false
---

## Fuel and Stack Overflows

Scala lets you, the programmer, write deeply nested types if you find it necessary to model your business logic.

Because types can refer to other types in ways that recurse without the base case being obvious, it's possible to write incorrect code whose recursion never terminates,
or correct code whose recursion is so deep that the compiler could run out of stack space while compiling.

**Starting with Scala 3.9.0**, the compiler tracks its stack use using "fuel", an abstract resource.
Recursive operations in the compiler consume fuel, and once a predefined fuel limit is reached, compilation fails.
This ensures the compiler does not run out of stack space, which would cause it to crash instead.

**In Scala 2 and Scala 3.8 or earlier**, the compiler attempts to catch stack overflows, which is not always reliable.

### Did I hit a compiler bug?

For **Scala 3.9 and newer**:
- If you get a `StackOverflowError`, and you did **not** set `-Xmax-fuel`, nor any JVM option related to stack space (when running on the JVM),
  yes, that's a compiler bug, because the compiler should run out of fuel before hitting a stack overflow.

>   Please [report it](https://github.com/scala/scala3/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer 2: I am still not convinced we can nor should make that promise.

### Increasing the fuel limit (Scala 3.9+)

To increase the fuel limit, pass `-Xmax-fuel:...` to the compiler.
You can check the default limit with ...TODO how?...

If possible, also increase the stack space, see below.
The default fuel limit is meant to work with normally-sized stacks, so if you increase the fuel limit without also increasing the stack space,
it's likely you'll run into stack overflow errors.

### Increasing stack space (all versions)

This depends on where you're running the compiler, _not_ on what target you're compiling for.
For instance, if you're running the Scala compiler on your laptop using `scala-cli` to target Scala.js, you should follow the JVM instructions.

On the **JVM**, pass `-Xss...` to the JVM, for example `-Xss16M`.
How to do this depends on what IDE and/or build tool you are using. For sbt, add it to `.jvmopts`.

On **Scala.js**, you cannot increase the stack space, because neither JavaScript nor WebAssembly allow this.
You can try increasing the fuel limit anyway, but you may have to instead limit your use of recursive types.

> On **Scala Native**, ...TODO what?...

Author: @WojciechMazur do we support running the compiler itself with Scala Native? What's the stack space story there?

Reviewer 3: Not yet, I heard there was some advance in running full compiler, with macros, on Scala.js. In the future we might try to do the same with Native, but I don't think it's in the current scope of work. 

However, Scala Native can control stack space natively (for the main thread) with system specific settings (altough default typically quite large, like 16MB), and for java.lang.Thread with env variable (SCALANATIVE_THREAD_STACK_SIZE=4M  simulating -Xss on the JVM) so not an issue for us. 
SN has some experimental support for detecting and throwing StackOverflowError (altough there is some runtime cost currently for methods that are known to cycle)

Author: OK, let me remove this bit here then, thanks for the explanation
